Part Three, Pattern Matching.
So, we're gonna talk about a few
things in this section, enums,
pattern matching itself,
methods, and type parameters.
Let's start with enums,
this is an enum and rust.
Enum is short for enumeration,
although if you've encountered
enumerations in other languages, they're
probably not quite what you're expecting
when it comes to how they work in rust.
Here's an example of how
to make one of these,
I'm gonna say let go equals color green.
Let stop equals color red, and
let's slow down equals color yellow.
So these are like American
traffic light colors.
So we're doing here is we're saying
that color is enumeration of three
different possible values.
So here I've said I've assigned
the variable go to be the green variant,
stop to be the red variant, and
slow down to be the yellow variant.
Now, in all three of these cases,
the type of the value is color, but
they have different values inside of them.
So much like how if I were to make
a string, I could have different values of
strings, some strings have
different contents than others.
Or, if I were to make a number,
there are different numbers,
values that can go inside
the same number type.
It's the same thing with enums, all three
of these have the same type, namely color,
but they have different values at runtime,
in this case, green, in this case,
red in this case, yellow.
So the type is what goes
after the word enum, and
then the things inside of
the curly braces are variants.
And the way that you instantiate them is
you sort of namespace them with the type
followed by colon, colon, and
then the name of the variant.
So you don't just say green or red or
yellow, you say color colon colon green,
or color colon colon red.
And that's just so that in case you
have multiple enums, in the same scope,
with overlapping variants.
Like let's say, I had another thing
that had something and it's called red,
I wouldn't want to get those mixed up.
And so this way I can distinguish
between color, colon, colon red, and
whatever my other thing is
that also has a red variance.
We can also add additional variants
that have data inside of them.
So here we have another variant called
custom, and I've actually included some
data that's that's known as
a payload within this variant.
So here, this is basically using normal
struct syntax, so I've set it red, green,
and blue.
This is basically like okay, let's say
I don't wanna have one of these normal
colors, I wanna have a custom color
with red, green, and blue each being u8.
So I could once again say go is green,
stop is red, but
now maybe I wanna just have
a color called purple.
And to do this I would say
color colon colon custom.
And then inside of this this would be
normal struct syntax like red 100,
green 0, blue 250.
And so this would be the way
that I would define a one of
these color custom variants.
Also, another way you can do this is
you can have it with tuples instead of
structs.
So here's an example of that, and so
I say color:: custom and just parentheses,
100, 0, 250.
Unlike regular tuples if you want, you can
actually have a tuple with one element
here, cuz that actually
is useful in this case.
But basically, either of these do exactly
the same thing, cuz like we saw in
the previous section, tuples and structs,
basically have the same feature set.
It's just a matter of whether you want
them to be labeled or done by position.
Also worth noting,
you can have as many of your variants use
payloads as you want, or none of them.
If you want, you can say, none of my
variants are gonna have payloads, or
you could say all of my variants
have payloads, or you could mix and
match like we've done here,
it's totally up to you.
Okay, so how do we get values out of these
variants once we've constructed them?
Well, that's where we're
gonna do pattern matching.
So let's say I've said let current
color equals color yellow.
So currently I'm looking at the color
yellow, but current color could have been
set to anything, or
it could even be a function argument.
And now, I'm gonna run a match on this.
So this match keyword works a little
bit like switch in other languages like
Java Script, but
there are also some differences.
So basically what this is saying,
is I give it a value, and it says,
okay, I'm going to do what's called
a pattern match on each of these.
And I'm basically going to go and try each
of these different branches one at a time,
until I find one that
matches current color.
So the first branch that it tries is
the color colon, colon green branch.
So basically it's saying, is current
color equal to color colon colon green?
Well, it's not, so it says okay,
I'm gonna skip over this entire block, and
move down to the next one.
This one, it's again gonna see that
this matches as, it does match,
so great, we're gonna run this branch.
Now, where are these differ from switch
statements that you might have seen in
other languages is a couple of ways.
Number one, with switch statements you
usually have to put something like break
after each one,
to prevent things from falling through.
That's not a thing here,
you don't need to say break
because there is no fall through.
The other big difference is that usually
when your saying switch your comparing
two, like a number or
maybe a string depending on the language.
But as we'll see, you can do actually a
good bit more with this pattern matching.
So, here's an example of
something more involved,
where we've got the color custom that
actually has the payload in there.
So here, we've got the same pattern match
for green, same pattern match for yellow.
And here, we're doing two things at once.
One, we're saying, okay,
if this variant is a custom variant,
then I wanna run this code, but also what
we're saying, is we're doing a struct
destructure in here, to give names to each
of the values inside that custom struct.
So basically we're saying, not only do I
want to run this code if it's a custom
variant, but also I wanna pull out
these red, green, and blue values.
And then now those are just variables that
only exist within these curly braces in
terms of scope.
So I can print line there red,
green, or blue, or
do whatever else I want with them.
And it'll be basically the same thing if
we use the the tuple style rather than
the struct style, except instead of being
curly braces, we would have the tuples.
But otherwise, it's exactly the same.
Much like with IF,
you can use match in the same way
as an expression if you like to.
So once again, we're seeing the same thing
that we saw with IF, where if you're gonna
say match on this thing, you can set it
equal to something if you if you like, but
then you do need to have
that semicolon at the end.
But, worth noting, that if you try to do
this, you and assign it to be something,
you actually do need to include
every single possible variant, or
at least have some coverage for
each of those.
Because otherwise, rust won't know
what to set color stir to be equal to.
So if you did this, it would say,
this is the compiler error you would get,
it would say patterns red and
customer not covered.
In other words, if rust runs this code,
and current color is equal to green or
yellow, okay, great it knows what to do,
to set color stir to be equal to.
But if it does not encounter, either green
or yellow, if it encounters red or custom,
it doesn't know what to do,
it doesn't know what to set color stir to.
And remember, rust doesn't have
a concept like null or undefined.
Instead, rust just has something
we'll see in a second.
But basically, since it wouldn't know
how to set that, it's gonna give you
a compiler error and say, you know what,
I need to know in all possible situations
what to do here, so that no matter what
I have something to set color stir to.
Here's one way you can do that,
this is what's called a catch all pattern,
it's basically an underscore.
And this basically says, yeah,
this just matches anything.
I don't care what I've got, if it didn't
match one of the previous patterns,
then I wanna run this branch right here.
Which is totally fine, that's
a reasonable way to go about doing it.
But, worth noting that there
is a downside if you do this.
And the downside is that this
error message is actually
potentially quite helpful when
you introduce a new variant,
because it will immediately pop up in
all of your matches that are doing this
style of matching,
if that don't have the underscore.
It'll say, hey,
you've forgot to incorporate it here,
you've forgot to incorporate it here.
But, if you do the catch all, now you have
this situation where whenever you add
a new variant here,
there's not gonna be any error,
which means you're not gonna
get a reminder to maybe go and
try to handle that differently,
depending on what logic is there.
So that's sort of a trade off.
You can feel free to use this underscore,
this default case if you want to or not,
but those are the trade offs.